## Welcome to Jared Pohl' portfolio

## Code Review:
<p align='center'>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/VWmZK4t3ujs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></p>

## Self Assessment:

As I have progressed through the computer science program, I have obtained many skills that have allowed me to step into the tech world and be successful. The skills I have obtained that have allowed for me to be a successful developer include team collaboration, communication to stakeholders, data structures and algorithms, software engineering and database usage, and security. All these skills have shaped me in a way that has significantly improved my ability to be a developer.

The skills I have learned through team collaboration have helped me to be successful in a team setting. This includes when other team members completely ruin a repository. What I mean by this is when I was in the course that taught us team collaboration the class encountered an issue where the repository that was in use had been completely altered to where the code that was needed for the assignments was no longer within the repository. This allowed me and other classmates to collaborate and work on a solution to revert the changes made to the repository so that we could recover the code that was deleted in a commit. This taught me the value of teamwork in the tech field. With this skill and value learned it has allowed me to be more valuable as a team member to the development team that I currently work on.

I also learned the values of communicating with stakeholders. Learning this skill has taught me to never just jump into a project. What I mean by this is that sometimes I have received an issue to work on for a project in my current role and the instructions were not clear. Learning this skill has allowed me to analyze what is needed in the feature and to ask questions if what is wanted is not clear. For instance, I have received an issue at work recently that has to deal with form validation. The team lead was not the person who created the issue. However, I looked at the issue and reviewed the code to see what was needed for the issue. After reviewing this information, it was not clear as to what form fields needed to be validated. Thus, leading to me getting clarity from the team lead for the issue. This is important because sometimes stakeholders will not always give you a clear understanding of what a feature should be and the behavior of the feature. 

Learning data structures and algorithms was tough for me. Not because of the critical thinking that is needed to understand what algorithm or data structure should be used but because this skill was learned through a language that was hardly touched on within the program. I learned this skill using the C++ coding language. However, learning this skill has helped me change my mindset from analytical thinking which is mainly used in the mechanical fields I have normally been in to critically thinking. What I mean by this is when a mechanic diagnoses and issue they are analyzing different parameter readings from scanners and other devices but when a feature is needing data and needs that data used in a certain way you must think critically to choose the correct data structure and algorithm. This is because you will need to ensure that the data structure chosen is able to hold and access the data as efficiently as possible. Same goes for algorithms. Algorithms need to be chosen by most efficient. This does not always apply to every role in the computer science field, however. For instance, a front-end web developer will not use binary trees, hash maps, or even linked lists within a project. They will mostly use arrays. This is true because I have noticed a lot of the data structures, I use personally at work are arrays and nothing that could potentially be more efficient. 

When learning software engineering and database skills from this program, I feel that I have grown more from learning these skills than that of any other skill I have learned in this program. I feel this way because when I was learning data structures and algorithms I found that being able to apply logic is more important than being able to remember what data structure to use when. I say this because any project in the tech field, from a developer/software engineers view, with require more logical thinking than that of any data structure. Like wise with databases, you will not only need to be able to set up a database, but you will also need to be able to communicate with it as well. This also requires logical thinking. I say this because when communicating with databases you will need to have error handling involved. This is because if you request certain data from the database an error will provide information regarding why the communication failed if the information is not in there or if the information is incorrect. 
	
I didn’t take any classes relating to security in this program. However, as I have progressed in my career as a front-end developer, I have found that security is a huge part of the computer science field. This is because we want to be able to allow users of projects to know that the information they are working with or on is safe. To allow users to have the safe feeling when using an application, security can be set in place through different methods. The main method I have found throughout my, so far, short career is through authentication when logging into the application. With this method the user is presented a bearer token behind the scenes allowing for them to access and utilize the application.
  
  
For this project I have chosen to rewrite an application that was initially a single page application. I chose to rewrite this project because it allowed me to showcase skills such as software engineering and design, data structures and algorithms, the use of database. To showcase my skills as a developer I utilized a MongoDB Atlas database. This database is a cloud database which allows for users to utilize this application from anywhere with out the need of a server in every location the application would or could be used. I also utilized the MERN (MongoDB, Express, React, Node) tech stack to develop this application. I chose this tech stack because it aligned with skills I have learned from my current role and would allow me to not only display my knowledge and ability to use this tech stack but also allow for refinement of basic abilities within this tech stack. Within this application, to showcase my skills within software engineering and design, you will find a simple, easy to use design for this application. You will also find that there are multiple pages within this application that allow for different functionalities within the CRUD operations. Also found in this application is the use of arrays. Using arrays and applying logical functions to them allow for the display of the skills learned from the data structures and algorithms course. The final piece you will find within this application is the database and the logic on the backend for communication with the database. This showcases my abilities to create and use a database within a project. As a whole this project shows my ability to develop a full stack application from start to finish. 


## Project Introduction:
I have chosen to rewrite a project that was initially completed in the CS340 class using the MERN (MongoDB, Express, React, Node) tech stack and other libraries such as MUI and react leaflet. This project was initially a single page application. It featured elements such as a table that allowed users to refine the data based on the selection of radio buttons. It also featured a map that allowed for geolocation services of the data within the project. Along with the map, it also featured a pie chart. Not all these features were recreated within this project. However, I feel that recreating this project allowed me to showcase my skills as a developer. This is the reason I included this project in my ePortfolio. I felt that with the design I wanted to have, the logic that I wanted within the project, and the database structure and usage that this project would really capture my skills that have been learned through the computer science program as well as my current role as a front-end developer. I did not have many challenges with rewriting this project. However, the main challenge I faced was initializing a backend to communicate with the database that I had set up. This was a challenge because I had not yet performed any development of a backend using Node before this project. To overcome this challenge, I did what most developers do. I performed research which was able to guide me to the final production of this application.   

## Software Design and Engineering Enhancement:
For the enhancements relating to software engineering and design, I started by looking at the original project. The original project was a single page application that did not have real design to it. I initialized the project and started by incorporating MUI components to introduce the side navigation bar within the application. I also used the MUI library to incorporate the top navigation bar that features a logout button. Along with this layout, the default colors that Mui components have allow for a soothing feeling when using the application. As I moved forward, I incorporated multiple pages and used the react-router-dom package. This package allowed for the easy navigation of the project. After getting the navigation of the project working properly, I initialized the tables on the dashboard and animal pages. This was done using the MUI library. The table on the dashboard was a basic MUI table component and the table on the animal page was initialized using MUI’s data grid component. I used this component because it features a built-in prop to add a toolbar to allow for users to search the table and refine the data based on their search criteria. Once I had initialized the tables and populated them with dummy data, I initialized the geolocation map. This was done using the react-leaflet library. With the map initialized I added the feature to be able to draw on the map using the react-leaflet-draw library. This will allow for user to search for animals based on the drawn shape on the map. 

## Data Structures and Algorithms Enhancment:
For the enhancements relating to data structures and algorithms, I, again, start by looking at the original project. The original project did not feature any algorithms or data structures for the storage of data. With the rewrite of this project, I used arrays for the data structure within the project. This is a basic form of data structure, but it served as storage for easier use of data through out the project. I used the arrays to allow for animals on the map to be selected through drawing a shape on the map. This allows for the selected animals on the map to show as selected on the table below the map. Also, within this project quite a bit of logic was needed to allow for the features to work properly. Most of the logic utilized algorithms that were initializes using if/else if/else/if statements. The project utilized this basic for of algorithm because there was not a need for any more advance algorithm. Aside from using the basic algorithms and data structures in this application, I also used built-in array functions. These functions allow for the looping of arrays without the need of a for loop. 

## Databases Enhancement:
For the enhancements relating to databases, again, I started with looking at what the original project had used for a database. The original project utilized a local MongoDB database for the project. I also utilized a MongoDB database. However, I used MongoDB’s cloud version Mongo Atlas, to allow the data to be used anywhere around the world. I implemented the backend in Node.js and Express.js with the help of a package known as mongoose. Using Node, Express, and Mongoose I was able to incorporate the routes for the crud operations needed in this project. Also, considering I had routes to hit and a database setup, I needed to make changes to the front end of the application to ensure the routes were being used properly for the operation that are required within the project. To do this, I used a promise-based HTTP Client called Axios. Axios allowed me to make calls to the routes when needing to create, read, update, or delete and animals from the database. Also, I implemented more redux toolkit slices to allow for state update to update the pages to reflect the database changes within the project. With these changes I feel that the course outcomes that were intended for me to achieve have been achieved. I think this because before this class I did not understand how Node and express or any of the other packages being used within the project worked together. This week I performed my research and followed the documentation and successfully incorporated the necessary enhancement.

## Polished Artifact:
This link will take you to the repository that has the polished version of the project rewrite /n
<a href='https://github.com/acepitcher2009/reactAAC'>Polished AAC Animal Shelter Project</a>

